---
title: "10 years after"
date: "2013-03-19"
tags: 
  - "laith"
---

**By Laith Yousif**

10 years ago, The days that changed the course of our lives as much as July 16 1979 which is the day Saddam took power.Despite the fact that most Iraqis hated Saddam, the way that the war got conducted could never be worse. from choosing a pathetic not knowledgeable person like Paul Bremer to lead a country that he have no idea about (his book claimed he went and bought books about Iraq 14 days before his assignment to understand the country ) . To hiring incompetent and partisan aides then they allowed sectarian Iraqi politicians to enter the governance counsel. And after all that allowing elections way before security which ensured all the thugs and the religious idiots would get elected as a result of the war since intimidation and lack of trust of people they did not know made the religious win the votes.  

All that may sound political, but to me its personal, those who lost their lives are human beings who did not have the opportunity to live, to see their family anymore, to continue to love and be loved. I was here during those days. I lost connection with my family on March 25th 2003, i did not know what happened to them till May 2003.

Thats why while moving away from Iraq and living the US for now almost 12 years I hold dearly to me the same believe that I had when I was there.  
I understand that war seems ok for many people, but its not to me , if you wanna go to war you do it without attacking cities , you do it on the borders man to man, and fix issue by issue far away from civilians, if you gonna bomb cities you are a coward who care less about human lives no matter whats your reasoning is , religion or politics, at the end all those who cause civilian deaths and argue that it was necessary are pathetic to me.
